---
layout: page
title: Motivation
permalink: /motivation/
---

The goal of this reading seminar is to explore and understand a novel, improved type of factorization homology constructed by Ayala--Francis--Rozenblyum in their paper titled *"Factorization Homology I: Higher Categories"*, which we will henceforth refer to as **$$\beta$$-factorization homology**. 

Factorization homology offers a robust, fine-tuned, and extremely elegant pairing of the topology of manifolds with the objects of higher algebra. Its intellectual roots lie among the following mathematical terrains: in its $$\alpha$$-version, it affords a topological treatment, and a further extension, of the work of Beilison and Drinfeld on an algebro-geometric interpretation of the role of configuration space integrals in conformal field theory. On the other hand, it improves on a formal and modern approach to mapping spaces using labeled configuration spaces, pioneered in the works of McDuff, Kallel and Segal.

Following the direction of mathematical motivation, factorization homology positively answers a question regarding the existence of a \emph{homology theory} suited exclusively to the world of manifold topology and the maps with which it is concerned, namely embeddings and submersions --- in particular, it differentiates between embeddings which are homotopic, yet not isotopic through embeddings. This stands in opposition to classical homology theories, like singular homology, which is defined on all spaces and all continuous maps among them. Taking motivation from mathematical physics, and following the vision of Costello and Gwilliam on perturbative QFT, factorization homology with coefficients in a \emph{$$n$$-disk stack} produces an algebraic model for the observables in a general topological quantum field theory, with the special case of an $$n$$-disk algebra corresponding to $$n$$-dimensional topological quantum field theories whose global observables are determined by restricting to the local ones.

The advantages of formalizing theories in this manner is immense, but its shortcomings are what we focus on. As an example, we can appeal to Chern-Simons theory in physics, a theory known to contain non-perturbative phenomena, like Wilson lines. $$\alpha$$-factorization homology, with its definition using embedded disks, is able to capture the locality of point-like observables, but it lacks the tools to inspect a line-shaped defect like a Wilson line. Stratified factorization homology is a first step in this direction, and one very much worth exploring. In this setting, defects, or to be more precise, stratifications on a manifold with appropriate algebraic data attached, are attributed an invariant. Defects in physics, though, are know to have interesting dynamics which are not captured by this invariant. To achieve that, an even more refined type of invariant must be manufactured, one which is manifestly built around smooth and singular families of stratifications. This is what $$\beta$$-factorization is all about.